docs(XO): add Windows cloudbase-init template guide (#8575)
vatesfr/xen-orchestra: docs/docs/windows-templates.md

# Windows Templates with Cloudbase-init: Step-by-step Guide & Best Practices

> In this guide, we provide a basic step-by-step guide for creating Windows templates with cloud-init support using [Cloudbase-init](https://cloudbase.it/cloudbase-init/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section provides step-by-step instructions for creating Windows templates that support cloud-init, using [Cloudbase-init](https://cloudbase.it/cloudbase-init/).
```

> With these templates, you can specify numerous system settings (hostname, users, password, etc.) without having to configure each VM manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these templates, you can specify many system settings (hostname, users, password, etc.) without setting up each VM manually.
```

> Read the [online documentation](https://cloudbase-init.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) for more details on how to use Cloudbase-init.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details on how to use Cloudbase-init, read the [online documentation](https://cloudbase-init.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html).
```

It's best to put the most important information up-front, so the reader will decide if they want to keep reading or if they're not interested.

In short, you will maintain a *master VM* containing a fresh, up-to-date copy of Windows.
From this master VM, you can branch out *template VMs* and customize them with drivers, tooling and settings as desired.
Finally, these template VMs will be generalized with Sysprep and converted into templates that can be used for VM creation.

> You will find an overview diagram below:

Reviewer: 'You will' can sound quite strong, like 'you must' do this or 'you will certainly' do this.

We can be a bit softer: 

```suggestion
Here's an overview diagram:
```
```suggestion
See the diagram below for an overview:
```

```suggestion
See the following diagram:
```

If the diagram immediately follows the text introducing it, I'm not sure 'below' is all that necessary.

![Overview diagram](./assets/windows-templates/overview.png)

> Following is a list of steps for preparing a Windows template:

Reviewer: We can sound more natural/casual here:

```suggestion
Here is a list of steps for preparing a Windows template:
```

1. Create and install master VM (for Windows Update)
2. Branch out master VM to template VM
3. Install software in template VM

> 4. Sysprep and reseal; template creation

Reviewer: Semicolons aren't very frequent in English. Some don't use them at all. Can we use a full stop (.) or 'and' instead?

Author: Fixed.

5. Instantiate new VM

:::tip
**Why use a master VM?**

> - Windows installed from older media may take a very long time to catch up with updates (especially in the case of Server 2016).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Windows installed from older media may take a very long time to catch up with updates (especially Windows Server 2016).
```

- Creating VMs from a recently-updated template also reduces the time and resources needed to bring each new VM up to date.

> - Many different kinds of template VMs can be branched from the same master, saving time and effort.

Reviewer: Use the active voice when possible, and bring the most important information to the start of the sentence:

```suggestion
- You can save time and effort by branching many different kinds of template VMs from the same master.
```

- Note that you don't need to produce a new template every time you update Windows.
  Instead, consider your VM update policy and refresh your templates as necessary.
- If you don't expect to have multiple different kinds of templates, feel free to install software directly onto your master VM.
  Every time you want to refresh your template, simply clone your master then run Sysprep.
:::

## Installing master VM

Create a Windows VM using the included default templates for Windows, then install Windows as usual.

> However, at the initial Welcome screen after Windows starts up, we will enter Audit mode by pressing **Ctrl+Shift+F3**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, at the initial Welcome screen after Windows starts up, press  **Ctrl+Shift+F3** to enter Audit mode.
```

:::tip

> Our guide uses Windows Server 2022, however any supported version of Windows would also work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our guide uses Windows Server 2022 as a reference, but any supported version of Windows works the same way.
```

:::

:::tip
We highly recommend starting from the default Windows templates, as they contain optimal settings for Windows guests.
Use at least 4 vCPUs and 4 GB of RAM to ensure that the update process goes smoothly.
:::

:::tip

> Audit mode is a special Windows boot mode that skips customizations normally applied after Setup

Reviewer: We should explain what Audit mode is **before** we tell the user to use it (at line 37)

Author: Fixed.

Using Audit mode helps avoid certain Sysprep issues, especially with Store apps.
:::

![Windows OOBE screen](./assets/windows-templates/1-audit1.png)

*Master VM: Press Ctrl+Shift+F3 here to enter Audit mode.*

Windows will automatically restart, and you will be presented with the Sysprep GUI as follows.

![Windows in Audit mode, with Sysprep window visible](./assets/windows-templates/1-audit2.png)

*Master VM: Windows in Audit mode*

:::warning
Keep this Sysprep window open throughout the entire Audit mode up until you manually invoke Sysprep.exe.
If you close the Sysprep window by accident, you may get locked out and be forced to reboot.
:::

Now, you can keep your master VM up-to-date using Windows Updates in preparation for future templates.

## Branching out template VM

Every time you want to refresh your templates, copy your master VM into a new *template VM*.
As its name indicated, this VM will become your new Windows template for future production VMs.

:::tip

> Use a full VM copy (*Copy* button) to avoid having too many VM disk layers, which may degrade performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use a full VM copy (**Copy** button) to avoid having too many VM disk layers, which may degrade performance.
```
To reference interface elements by their name (e.g. buttons, page/tab titles, etc.), I recommend we use bold instead of italics so the reader can scan/find them with less effort

:::

![Copy VM](./assets/windows-templates/1-copyvm.png)

## Installing software in template

You can install any software you need in this template.
In this example, we install the XenServer VM Tools:

![XenServer VM Tools Setup Settings](./assets/windows-templates/2-winpv2.png)

You can freely restart the VM when prompted.
Once restarted, the VM will go back to Audit mode until you run Sysprep again.

## Configure Cloudbase-init

Grab the latest installer from [cloudbase.it](https://cloudbase.it/cloudbase-init/) and start the installation process.

![Installing Cloudbase-init](./assets/windows-templates/2-cbi1.png)

> Don't run Sysprep at this step yet; you still need to configure Cloudbase-init.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't run Sysprep yet; you still need to configure Cloudbase-init.
```

![Cloudbase-init is installed, don't sysprep yet](./assets/windows-templates/2-cbi2.png)

Enter the directory `C:\Program Files\Cloudbase Solutions\Cloudbase-Init\conf`.
You will find the following two files: `cloudbase-init.conf` and `cloudbase-init-unattend.conf`.
For each file, replace any `metadata_services` lines with the following:

```
metadata_services=cloudbaseinit.metadata.services.nocloudservice.NoCloudConfigDriveService
```

This line makes sure Cloudbase-init uses the NoCloud configuration drive (as generated by XO) as its data source.

![Configuring cloudbase-init.conf](./assets/windows-templates/3-cbi.png)

Your VM is now ready for conversion to template.

## Sysprep and reseal

> Close the running Sysprep window, then run the following command in a PowerShell window running as Administrator:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Close the running Sysprep window and run the following command in a PowerShell window running as Administrator:
```
The sentence is more fluid that way

```
C:\Windows\System32\Sysprep\sysprep.exe /generalize /oobe /shutdown "/unattend:C:\Program Files\Cloudbase Solutions\Cloudbase-Init\conf\Unattend.xml"
```

:::warning

> - You must specify Cloudbase-init's Unattend.xml since this file is what starts the cloud-init configuration process.

Reviewer: Be careful with 'you must'. It comes off as strong in English, and some people don't like being told what they 'must' do, or be ordered around.

We can avoid this, using softer language and by telling the reader why the action is necessary and benefits them: 

```suggestion
- Specify Cloudbase-init's Unattend.xml. This file is necessary to start the cloud-init configuration process.
```

> - The Unattend parameter should be fully quoted because the Unattend.xml path contains spaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The **Unattend** parameter should be fully quoted because the Unattend.xml path contains spaces.
```

:::

> Once the Sysprep process is complete, your template VM will shut itself down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the Sysprep process is complete, your template VM will shut down.
```

![Sysprep is running](./assets/windows-templates/4-sysprep.png)

> Finally, immediately convert your VM to a template; do not start it again or the cloud-init configuration process will begin.

Reviewer: Adverbs, especially adverbs ending in '-ly' are tempting, but can sound generic or weigh a sentence down when using them too much. In this case, using two in a row, like 'finally' and 'immediately' sounds heavy, like you're _really_ insisting on it.

Always ask yourself what value an adverb brings to your sentence, and if you'd lose anything by removing it.

In most cases, you want to remove unnecessary words while keeping the same meaning (unless you shorten it so much it sounds weird). A shorter sentence is easier to remember and more impactful.

```suggestion
Convert your VM to a template; do not start it again or the cloud-init configuration process will begin.
```

## Instantiating new VMs

Create VMs from your prepared template and enter your cloud-init configs as necessary.

![Create VM from template](./assets/windows-templates/5-instantiate.png)

:::tip
Refer to the [Cloudbase-init plugins documentation](https://cloudbase-init.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins.html) for information on how to configure cloud-init for Windows guests.
:::

> Your VMs will reboot several times during the unseal process.

Reviewer: 'Unsealing' process, maybe?

Author: Fixed.

![Windows is getting ready](./assets/windows-templates/5-unseal.png)

> Enjoy your finished product.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enjoy your finished product!
```

Maybe?

![VM with hostname set as desired](./assets/windows-templates/6-finish.png)

## Tips and tricks

> - If you are Sysprepping an installation containing the XenServer/XCP-ng PV drivers, you may need to set the PersistAllDeviceInstalls option in your Unattend.xml. (Cloudbase-init's Unattend.xml already includes this option)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you are Sysprepping an installation containing the XenServer/XCP-ng PV drivers, you may need to set the `PersistAllDeviceInstalls` option in your Unattend.xml` (Cloudbase-init's `Unattend.xml` already includes this option).
```
